<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" lang="en">
<head>
<meta charset="utf-8" />
<title>Hurt People Hurt People</title>
</head>
<body>
<main>
<article>
<h1>Hurt People Hurt People</h1>
<address class="h-card">
	by
	<a rel="author" class="u-url" href="http://reiver.link/"><span class="p-given-name">Charles</span> <span class="p-additional-name">Iliya</span> <span class="p-family-name">Krempeaux</span></a>
</address>
<p>
	The phrase “<strong>Hurt people hurt people.</strong>” is an adage — a short statement expressing a truth.
</p>
<section>
	<h2>Meaning</h2>
	<p>
		Adages are often short.
		But, in this case, the meaning of this adage could probably more easily be inferred if the adage was instead a bit longer; and, in particular, if it was said as:
	</p>
	<p>
		“<strong>Some hurt people hurt other people.</strong>”
	</p>
	<p>
		The basic meaning of this adage is, some (but <em>not</em> necessarily all) individuals who have experienced significant emotional or physical pain or trauma may be more likely to hurt and inflict hard on others as a result of their own suffering.
	</p>
	<p>
		And that, monsters aren't necessarily born, but are made.
	</p>
	<p>
		That a monster might have started as a victim themselves.
		Maybe due to another person's or persons' action, or maybe due to an <em>act of nature</em>. 
	</p>
</section>
<section>
	<h2>Cycle of Pain</h2>
	<p>
		This phenomenon (of <em>some hurt people hurting other people</em>) implies a potentially recurring pattern of potentially escalating violence.
		That one person who is hurt may in turn hurt one or more other people.
		And those (one or more) other people may in turn hurt yet more people.
		Etc.
	</p>
	<p>
		It is similar to a <em>chain-reaction</em>, to an <em>explosion</em>, and the spread of a <em>contageon</em>.
	</p>
</section>
<section>
	<h2>Ending or Preventing the Cycle of Pain</h2>
	<p>
		Some ways exist to potentially end or prevent <strong>cycle of pain</strong> —
	</p>
	<section>
		<h3>Breaking the Cycle</h3>
		<p>
			The <strong>cycle of pain</strong> may sometimes be able to be broken through:
		</p>
		<ul>
			<li>compassion,</li>
			<li>awareness, and</li>
			<li>forgiveness.</li>
		</ul>
	</section>
	<section>
		<h3>Feuds</h3>
		<p>
			<strong>Feuds</strong> are a sub-set of the phenomenon of <em>some hurt people hurting other people</em>.
		</p>
		<p>
			Many human populations across space &amp; time have lived in a condition where feuds, with their escalating violence, are not uncommon.
		</p>
		<p>
			The fighting and killing in these situations can go on and on and on like a chain reaction.
		</p>
		<p>
			Each killing as vengeance on one side enrages the other side to seek vengeance and kill.
		</p>
		<p>
			It is a vicious cycle.
		</p>
		<p>
			Some cultures have ways (institutions) of try to prevent these feuds and this escalating violence.
			Some of these are (in alphabetical order):
		</p>
		<ul>
			<li>blood revenge,</li>
			<li>execution,</li>
			<li>deferring vengence to a third-party,</li>
			<li>honor killings,</li>
			<li>ingroup punishments,</li>
			<li>ingroup sanctions,</li>
			<li>mob violence,</li>
			<li>mock combat,</li>
			<li>ostracism,</li>
			<li>public humiliation,</li>
			<li>ritualized combat,</li>
			<li>ritualized escalation,</li>
			<li>symbolic ceremonies,</li>
			<li>weregild,</li>
			<li><em>etc</em>.</li>
		</ul>
	</section>
</section>
<section>
	<h2>Possible Causes</h2>
	<p>
		Some of the possible causes include —
	</p>
	<section>
		<h3>Reflection of Internal Pain</h3>
		<p>
			One potential cause of the <em>some hurt people hurting other people</em> phenomenon is that — it is a <em>reflection of internal pain</em>.
		</p>
		<p>
			For some, lashing out at others is a coping-mechanism for unresolved anger, frustration, and pain.
			It can be a way of expressing hurt for an individual who cannot or does not want to articulate it directly.
		</p>
	</section>
	<section>
		<h3>Perpetuating Learned Behavior</h3>
		<p>
			Another potential cause of the <em>some hurt people hurting other people</em> phenomenon is that — it is a <em>perpetuating learned behavior</em>.
		</p>
		<p>
			The <strong>cycle of pain</strong> can be passed down from one generation to another generation to another, etc.
		</p>
		<p>
			For example, a person raised in an abusive environment may internalize harmful patterns and (without intervention to stop it) repeat the same behaviors in their own relationships.
		</p>
	</section>
	<section>
		<h3>Distorted View</h3>
		<p>
			Another potential cause of the <em>some hurt people hurting other people</em> phenomenon is that — it is a <em>distorted view</em>.
		</p>
		<p>
			Trauma can cause a person to develop a distorted perception of themselves and others.
			This can affect how they judge others and inact with them.
		</p>
	</section>
</section>
</article>
</main>
</body>
</html>
